All right, that wasn't too bad,
writing a server in five minutes.
However, we just wrote a server, but
it doesn't really do anything cuz we don't
have all the files we need
to actually make it run.
We don't have node,
we don't have our index.html.
So let's walk through how to even get
to the steps to get this server to run.
So let's write this node server and
then we're gonna walk through,
talk about Homebrew which is
how we install things on OSX.
Then we're gonna solve node then we're
gonna write the world's most basic HTML
file, cuz you need all these things
to actually get the server to run.
But let's start at the basic node server.
And I'm gonna do this all in Vim.
So we can do wherever,
it doesn't matter in the root or not.
I'm gonna use my temp directory because
I like to keep my file system clean and
I know I will probably
clean this up later.
So I'm gonna say vi simple server.
And this one is not a kind of
random file like we touched, so
this one's js, so
we're gonna say simpleServer.js.
I'm gonna go to insert mode.
So the first thing we need
to import from node is http.
So we say http require(' http').
So that's just the library that allows
us to make requests and response.
And this is all built in the node,
it's fantastic,
we don't have to NPM install anything.
Next thing we're gonna do is
we're gonna import FS, which is,
again, built in a node,
allows us access the file system.
FS file system, pretty straightforward
just like HTTP, nothing groundbreaking.
So FS, and we need to we need to
access the file system because,
well, we're serving files.
This isn't actually a necessary step,
it is for this exercise but
I can actually just write
a response back into,
I can write data back the response and
I never even need to create an HTML file.
We're just doing it for
this exercise because it's a little bit
easier to grok the first time around.
Maybe later we'll just write
directly to responses and
we don't need any files at all.
So next up,
I'm gonna be a good engineer and
I'm gonna define my constants up top,
and constants we like to give
all caps to let people know it's
a constant and it won't change.
You don't necessarily need to do this,
you can just 3,000 later down the line.
We will dive more into ports and
why they're necessary, why we pick 3,000.
But for now we're picking 3,000, 3,000 is
generally accepted as the unused port for
development.
There's nothing that binds to 3,000.
There are some ports that we'll
find out that you can't use,
they're already in use like port 22 is for
SSH,
port 80 is for HTTP,
post 443 is for HTTPS.
Yeah, I used to know of so many more
ports, my memory, it's just the gray hair.
I forget how many ports, there's a lot.
>> 65,000 something.
>> 65,000, that sounds right.
Yeah, so
you're not really gonna run out of ports,
the only chance you have is you
might have a port collision.
But lets just stick with 3,000,
you may see 8,000 in some tutorials,
you may see 8080, those are all
fine too but we define our port.
Next let's define our server, so
we'll say const server = http,
built in library and not complex,
we're gonna say createServer.
Pretty easy and createServer is gonna
take a function as an argument.
Don't mind the way I code,
I just like to close off my parentheses
early because later, I'll be like,
why isn't this working and
it's always a missing bracket parentheses.
So I do it ahead of time.
So say function, again,
I like to do this ahead of time.
So every server,
it doesn't matter if it's node or
tomcats or
try to think as Python with Django or
Flask or Ruby or Rails, it doesn't matter.
Every single server has two basic things.
A request, we'll call it req,
you can call it request if you want, and
a response, we'll call it res.
These are fundamental
things of every server.
The request coming in, so if someone's
making a request to your server,
as we said, servers just serve,
respond to requests, and the response.
What do we tell the request,
the person asking?
So, naturally when we need to
write a response, what do we do?
We do it in the response.
So we'll say res or response.
We're gonna write to the head, which I'll
talk about what it means in a second.
I'm gonna close that off early.
So, we're writing to the head.
So this means the response is made
up of a lot of different parts.
And maybe a little bit later we can
dive into, we can do a console there and
we can dive into what
a response actually looks like.
It's very, very big,
there's a lot of moving parts.
But for now,
we're gonna write directly into that
response into the head of the response.
So we're going to give it a 200.
200 is a status code.
It just means, okay, everything's good.
The most common status code.
I'm so excited, we're gonna dive
way more into these things.
We're gonna talk about request and
response,
we're gonna talk about status codes,
why they're important.
They seem trivial, but
they're really important.
But for now,
we're just gonna say everything's okay and
we wanna be good citizens, so
we wanna give it a content type.
So right now we are writing
a header content type
And it's the text/html.
And this is just to help the browser out,
to let it know, what are we sending back?
I think sometimes you can infer content,
it depends on the browser, but
we generally want to be
as explicit as possible.
So there, we just wrote a header
as part of the response.
Headers are not part of the response body,
they're just metadata attached
to the response that says,
hey, are you logged in?
What are the cookies you have?
What's the status code, etc, etc.
We can go on and on about responses.
But for now, we wrote 200, and we told
it we're sending back an HTML file.
Next, we're gonna create a read stream.
We're not gonna write to it,
we're just going to read.
So we're gonna say,
file system creates a readable stream.
And we're gonna say this fictional
file we haven't created yet,
called index.html and we're just
gonna pipe it into the response.
The streams and node are,
well, they're not new,
they were new when node was invented but
streams are awesome.
So instead of loading up these files and
it's really small at this level,
it's only gonna be less than a kilobyte.
But imagine you had, I don't know,
a 20 megabyte PHP file.
And if you're like, there's no such
thing as a 20 megabyte PHP file,
that just tells me you've
never written PHP.
It is absolutely possible.
So in the normal days,
you'd have to open that entire file.
So you have to load it all in the memory,
pass it into your application server or
your web server, and then serve it out.
But with streams,
we just start at the head of the file and
we just pipe that into the next,
into the response itself.
So it's much faster and
much more memory efficient.
Cognitively, streams can be a little bit
harder to deal with cuz you're not dealing
with a static file that's in place, you're
dealing with a stream of information.
I'm sure there's
the Frontend Masters Course on OGS and
where they get way in the streams and
I will add it to the slides
>> Scott moss.
>> By Scott moss,
also a former Netflix engineer,
there's a theme here about good courses.
No, no, I'm kidding.
Amazing instructor and
a really nice guy, yes.
>> There's a comment about wanting to
get syntax highlighting in them and
someone said, colon syntax space on-
>> Let's try it.
I am a simple man of simple tastes, so
it's :syntax dash on or just on?
>> Space on.
>> It's hard to see but
that is slightly purple.
Pretty nice.
>> It does look nice.
>> There's a way, so I think I copy and
pasted this code out of VS code which
copied my syntax over but really want to
get familiar with VI cuz this is where
we're gonna be writing all that code.
And you can't use VS code on your server,
I mean, you can but we'll talk about that
too, how to do that All right,
and am I missing a bracket?
No, I think I got them all.
Okay, I'm just gonna add a semicolon
just because I'm a purist like that.
So that's our server, great, now what?
Well, the server is not
actually doing anything yet,
it doesn't know where to listen.
So we have to open that port for it and
tell it which port to listen to.
>> That's pretty straightforward,
we're gonna say server.listen and
we're gonna use r constant
of top called PORT.
And this is just for our own benefits,
you don't have to write a console log.
But it's nice to know when
your server actually ran.
Otherwise, it's just an empty process or
it just looks like an empty process.
Ports and we gonna say dollar sign.
PORT.
Okay there you just
wrote a node server and
we walk through each of these lines and
see what they do.
Most of these we're gonna dive into
a bit more about HTTP headers or
response codes, things like that.
But for now, yeah, that's a server in
a couple of lines, but to make it run
we're gonna need a little bit extra
software which you may or may not have.
Some of these things, you may have
if you code in your day-to-day.
But if you don't, let's walk through
how to actually run this right now.
So I'm gonna write quit.
So the file we're missing
right now is the index.html.
We didn't write it, let's see what
the minimal response we can get to make it
say, actually work in a browser.
So I'm gonna say vi index.html.
And I'm gonna be a rebel here.
I'm gonna say hello world and
we'll see this totally invalid HTML.
We'll see if it works in the browser.
Okay, next we need node.
I have node installed,
I like to check the version just in case.
So I'm running node 16.
I think the latest is 19.
Doesn't really matter for this case,
unless you're running something really old
like eight, which I don't know have
streams, but this version's okay.
And you're, if you don't have node
installed, let's brew install node.
So we can say brew install node.
It's looking.
And Node's already installed
on a different version.
I'm using something called NVM.
I really don't want to go to
the rabbit hole of tools,
cuz people be like, but I'm using this,
I'm using MPX to do this.
But NVM is pretty awesome too,
it lets you switch node versions on
the fly so I can say nvm use 19.
I think I have 19 installed and
I just switched another version very nice.
I highly recommend nvm but
that's not the purpose of this,
we really don't have to
go down that rabbit hole.
I did use something called Homebrew,
which if you haven't used it,
I'm about to blow your mind again.
[LAUGH] There's a whole world of
things to make your life easier.
And let's use our Google Foo here.
And I'm gonna do everything
as I do in incognito,
not cuz I'm doing anything nefarious.
I just do this by default, I'm really
against tracking on the internet.
That's a whole other rant I'll go into,
but this type of Homebrew.
So, consult Homebrew,
you can just copy this to your terminal.
I won't to cuz I already
have Homebrew installed and
who knows what happen if I
try to install it twice.
But Homebrew is a package manager for
Mac Os.
Similar to kind of MPM is the node
package manager, Homebrew does that too.
It's not in anything official,
I wouldn't say, Apple's not like, yeah,
we own Homebrew.
But if you've never used Homebrew,
it is fantastic for installing things.
It makes life so much easier.
So if you want to install Homebrew,
you brew installed node and
then now we have node installed.
You don't have to use nvm
if you don't want to,
I think you can brew install nvm too.
So you can you can kind of do it lots.
Okay, so hopefully you all have Homebrew
installed and let's jump back here.
So now I'm gonna say,
node simpleServer.js.
Hey, work the first time,
that almost never happens.
So usually I'm missing something,
but this is only a few lines.
And so let's navigate back to our browser,
so we're gonna use localhost.
I'm going to say port 3000.
The colon gives it a port, look at that.
Our non-HTML page works.
In case you didn't know, browsers
are really familiar with parsing HTML.
You can kind of do whatever you want,
you can make up tags and it'll work.
It'll just ignore them if
it doesn't understand it.
In this case,
we're just writing simple texts.
Nothing super advanced here.
However, this is might be the simplest
HTML file I've ever made.
It's not proper HTML.
So hopefully you got this far, you wrote
a server, you wrote a really simple HTML
file, you installed all the files and
now you have your server running.
From here the possibilities are endless,
I expect you to have Netflix
written in the next couple of days.
Now that you know how to do this, yeah.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Yeah,
probably a weekend project I would say,
a little more advanced.
Next weekend will be some sort of AI
like ChatGPT 4, we're on the way here.
If you're wondering what local host is,
that's just your local computer.
I can also type 127, 0.0,
hey look at that, the same as localhost.
Localhost is just a shortcut for
127.0.0.1.
That is a reserved IP, all computers
have it, it's just a loopback command.
It just says look at the open
ports on my local machine.
There are a few other reserved IPs,
what's one?
This isn't my network so
I'm gonna say 192.168,
I don't know it's gonna pop up here, .0.1.
Will it work?
I don't know, probably won't work.
That's usually 1, 2 or
192.168.0.1 is usually your router.
It could be 198.168.1.1.2.
So go home and try that out and
see what pops up.
It's probably gonna be your router,
your modem.
So these are just local addresses
that are well known, if you're, Jem,
how do you remember all these things?
I don't know, I've just done it enough
times that these things kind of build into
your muscle memory.
>> I'd like to imagine that the browser
engineers appreciate how bad we are, and
so it's like as permissive
a definition of HTML as possible.
>> [LAUGH] Browsers are probably the most
forgiving software on the planet.
They let you get away with
pretty much anything.
And couple that with
the fact that JavaScript,
one of its core features is
its backwards compatible.
So that web page you wrote in 2002
in JavaScript will still work today.
I mean, it's absolutely incredible,
I will gush on about this later but
the internet in my opinion is
man's greatest achievements.
It's just the amount of work and
collaboration cooperation to make all
these things happen, all these different
pieces of technology work together,
without some overviewing
government governing body.
It's just, it's unparalleled.
We've never achieved anything
else like it in humanity.
Anyways, I'm going on,
you can tell I love what I do and
I love Full Stack and
diving into these things.
So hopefully, if you got stuck on
something, double check your code,
you might be missing a quotation mark or
closing a bracket, something like that.
Again, the node version doesn't
matter as long as it's high enough.
The default that you install with
brew should be high enough to run
a readable stream.